doc: add ROScube GSG (#5583)
projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor: doc/getting-started/roscube/roscube-gsg.rst

Getting Started Guide for ACRN Industry Scenario with ROScube-I
###############################################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 1

Verified version
****************

- Ubuntu version: **18.04**
- GCC version: **7.5.0**
- ACRN-hypervisor branch: **v2.1**
- ACRN-Kernel (Service VM kernel): **v2.1**
- RT kernel for Ubuntu User OS: **Linux kernel 4.19.59 with Xenomai 3.1**
- HW: `ROScube-I`_

  ADLINK `ROScube-I`_ is a real-time `ROS 2`_-enabled robotic controller based
  on Intel® Xeon® 9th Gen Intel® Core™ i7/i3 and 8th Gen Intel® Core™ i5
  processors. It features comprehensive I/O connectivity supporting a wide
  variety of sensors and actuators for unlimited robotic applications.

.. _ROScube-I:
   https://www.adlinktech.com/Products/ROS2_Solution/ROS2_Controller/ROScube-I?lang=en

.. _ROS 2:
   https://index.ros.org/doc/ros2/

Architecture
************

This tutorial will show you how to install the ACRN Industry Scenario on ROScube-I.
The scenario is shown here:

> .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-architecture.png

Reviewer: Sure, we can use the picture here instead.
https://github.com/Adlink-ROS/ROScube_ACRN_guide/blob/master/images/rqi-acrn-architecture.png

> .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-architecture.png

Reviewer 2: @dbkinder can you help make this update?

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-config-scenario-settings.png

#. Settings "HV": You can ignore this if your RAM is <= 16GB.

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-config-hv-settings.png

#. Settings "VM0": Select the hard disk currently used.

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-config-vm0-settings.png

#. Settings "VM1": Enable all the cpu_affinity.
   You can press :kbd:`+` to increase CPU ID.
   This doesn't mean to attach all CPUs to the VM. The CPU number can be
   adjusted later.

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-config-vm1-settings.png

#. Settings "VM2": Set up RT flags and enable all the cpu_affinity.

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-config-vm2-settings1.png

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-config-vm2-settings2.png

#. Export XML.

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-config-export-xml.png

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-config-export-xml-submit.png

#. Generate configuration files.

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-config-generate-config.png

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-config-generate-config-submit.png

#. Close the browser and stop the process (Ctrl+C).

#. Optional: Patch the hypervisor if you want to passthrough GPIO to VM.

   .. code-block:: bash

     cd ~/acrn/acrn-hypervisor

>      wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Adlink-ROS/ROScube_ACRN_guide/master/patch/0001-Fix-ROScube-I-gpio-pin-assignment-table.patch

Reviewer: I've already tag v2.1 on the repo, so it's ok to replace master with v2.1 now.

>      wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Adlink-ROS/ROScube_ACRN_guide/master/patch/0001-Fix-ROScube-I-gpio-pin-assignment-table.patch

Reviewer 2: Thanks! @dbkinder , can you help update the various URLs to use the tagged version?

#. Optional: Use ACRN kernel if you want to passthrough GPIO to User VM.

   .. code-block:: bash

     sudo apt install git build-essential bison flex libelf-dev libssl-dev liblz4-tool

     # Clone code
     git clone -b release_2.1 https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-kernel
     cd acrn-kernel

     # Set up kernel config
     cp kernel_config_uos .config
     make olddefconfig
     export ACRN_KERNEL_UOS=`make kernelversion`
     export UOS="ROS2SystemUOS"
     export BOOT_DEFAULT="${ACRN_KERNEL_UOS}-${UOS}"
     sed -ri "/CONFIG_LOCALVERSION=/s/=.+/=\"-${UOS}\"/g" .config

     # Build and install kernel and modules
     make all
     sudo make modules_install
     sudo make install

     # Update Grub
     sudo sed -ri \
       "/GRUB_DEFAULT/s/=.+/=\"Advanced options for Ubuntu>Ubuntu, with Linux ${BOOT_DEFAULT}\"/g" \
       /etc/default/grub
     sudo update-grub

#. Poweroff the VM after complete.

   .. code-block:: bash

     sudo poweroff

Run User VM
===========

Now back to the native machine to set up the environment for launching
the User VM.

#. Install dependency.
   The origin version of iasl is too old for ACRN and should be upgraded.

   .. code-block:: bash

>      sudo apt install iasl

Author: The "next few steps" only make and then copy the updated iasl binary.  Is there more to the iasl installation (such as man pages, etc.) that would be missed if the ``sudo apt install iasl`` isn't done first?  Or should there be a ``make install`` after the ``make iasl``?

>      sudo apt install iasl

Reviewer 2: The `iasl` binary is all we need for ACRN. It's not really visible to the ACRN user so I don't feel we need the manpages. We do not do a `make install` because it does not install `iasl` under `/usr/sbin` and this path is hard-coded in our code. So even if we did a `make install`, we'd have to manually copy the binary again.

     cd /tmp
     wget https://acpica.org/sites/acpica/files/acpica-unix-20191018.tar.gz
     tar zxvf acpica-unix-20191018.tar.gz
     cd acpica-unix-20191018
     make clean && make iasl
     sudo cp ./generate/unix/bin/iasl /usr/sbin/

#. Convert KVM image file format.

   .. code-block:: bash

     mkdir -p ~/acrn/uosVM
     cd ~/acrn/uosVM
     sudo qemu-img convert -f qcow2 -O raw /var/lib/libvirt/images/ROS2SystemUOS.qcow2 ./ROS2SystemUOS.img

#. Prepare a Launch Script File.

   .. code-block:: bash

     wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Adlink-ROS/ROScube_ACRN_guide/master/scripts/launch_ubuntu_uos.sh
     chmod +x ./launch_ubuntu_uos.sh

> #. Set up network and reboot to take effect.

Reviewer 2: @evshary , can you explain if this is any different? I'm thinking it may be beneficial to stick to the same method we already use in ACRN (and which is based on `systemd`) rather than modifying Sysinit V scripts which are more of a legacy thing.

> #. Set up network and reboot to take effect.

Reviewer: @gvancuts  I'll check that. I think using systemd or sysinit V scripts makes no different.

   .. code-block:: bash

     mkdir -p ~/acrn/tools/
     wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Adlink-ROS/ROScube_ACRN_guide/master/scripts/acrn_bridge.sh
     chmod +x ./acrn_bridge.sh
     ./acrn_bridge.sh
     sudo reboot

#. **Reboot to ACRN kernel** and now you can launch the VM.

   .. code-block:: bash

     cd ~/acrn/uosVM
     sudo ./launch_ubuntu_uos.sh

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

Install real-time VM
********************

Copy real-time VM image
=======================

.. note:: Please create real-time VM image on **native Linux kernel**,
   not ACRN kernel, or you'll get an error message.

#. Clone real-time VM from User VM. (Right-click User VM and then clone)

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-rtos-clone.png

#. You'll see the real-time VM is ready.

   .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-rtos-ready.png

Set up real-time VM
===================

.. note:: The section will show you how to install Xenomai on ROScube-I.

>    You can contact ADLINK for more detail information.

Author: Yep.  We need a link for how to contact ADLINK, or is there a document link we can point them to? or just an email  link to service@adlinktech.com ?  Or maybe here: https://gitlab.denx.de/Xenomai/xenomai/-/wikis/Installing_Xenomai_3

>    You can contact ADLINK for more detail information.

Reviewer: We're checking the contact window right now, and will get back to you after confirmation.

>    You can contact ADLINK for more detail information.

Reviewer: @dbkinder Here is the link to contact ADLINK for more information
https://go.adlinktech.com/ROS-Inquiry_LP.html

     #GRUB_TIMEOUT_STYLE=hidden
     GRUB_TIMEOUT=5
     ...
     GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX="xenomai.allowed_group=1234"

#. Update GRUB.

   .. code-block:: bash

     sudo update-grub

#. Poweroff the VM.

   .. code-block:: bash

     sudo poweroff

Run real-time VM
================

Now back to the native machine and we'll set up the environment for
launching the real-time VM.

#. Convert KVM image file format.

   .. code-block:: bash

     mkdir -p ~/acrn/rtosVM
     cd ~/acrn/rtosVM
     sudo qemu-img convert -f qcow2 \
       -O raw /var/lib/libvirt/images/ROS2SystemRTOS.qcow2 \
       ./ROS2SystemRTOS.img

#. Create a new launch file

   .. code-block:: bash

     wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Adlink-ROS/ROScube_ACRN_guide/master/scripts/launch_ubuntu_rtos.sh
     chmod +x ./launch_ubuntu_rtos.sh

#. **Reboot to ACRN kernel** and now you can launch the VM.

   .. code-block:: bash

     cd ~/acrn/rtosVM
     sudo ./launch_ubuntu_rtos.sh

.. note:: Please use ``poweroff`` instead of ``reboot`` in the real-time VM.
   In ACRN design, the system will also reboot while rebooting real-time VM.

> About the Launch File

Reviewer 2: How about renaming this section to "Customizing the launch files"?

*********************

The launch file in this tutorial has the following hardware resource allocation.

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Resource", "Service VM", "User VM", "Real-time VM"
   :widths: 15, 15, 15, 15

   "CPU", "0", "1,2,3", "4,5"
   "Memory", "Remaining", "8 GB", "2 GB"
   "Ethernet", "Ethernet 1 & 2", "Ethernet 3", "Ethernet 4"
   "USB", "Remaining", "1-2", "1-1"

You can modify the launch file for your own hardware resource allocation.
We'll provide some modification methods below.

> For more detail, please refer to `Device Model Parameters

Reviewer 2: Use `:ref:` instead of URL

<https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/user-guides/acrn-dm-parameters.html>`_.

CPU
===

> Modify the number behind ``--cpu-affinity`` in the command acrn-dm.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modify the number behind ``--cpu-affinity`` in the ``acrn-dm`` command arguments.
```

> The number should be from 0 to max CPU ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The number should be in between 0 and max CPU ID.
```

For example, if you want to run VM with core 1 and 2, use ``--cpu-affinity 1,2``.

Memory
======

> Modify the ``mem_size`` in launch file. This variable will be passed to acrn-dm.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modify the ``mem_size`` in launch file. This variable will be passed to ``acrn-dm``.
```

The possible values are 1024M, 2048M, 4096M, 8192M.

Ethernet
========

Run ``lspci -Dnn | grep "Ethernet controller"`` to get the ID of Ethernet port.

.. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-ethernet-lspci.png

> You'll see 4 ID for each Ethernet port.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You'll see 4 IDs, one for for each Ethernet port.
```
?

Assign the ID of the port you want to passthrough in the launch file.
For example, if we want to passthrough Ethernet 3 to the VM:

.. code-block:: bash

  passthru_vpid=(
  ["ethernet"]="8086 1539"
  )
  passthru_bdf=(
  ["ethernet"]="0000:04:00.0"
  )

  # Passthrough ETHERNET
  echo ${passthru_vpid["ethernet"]} > /sys/bus/pci/drivers/pci-stub/new_id
  echo ${passthru_bdf["ethernet"]} > /sys/bus/pci/devices/${passthru_bdf["ethernet"]}/driver/unbind
  echo ${passthru_bdf["ethernet"]} > /sys/bus/pci/drivers/pci-stub/bind

  acrn-dm
  ⋮
  -s 4,passthru,04/00/0 \
  ⋮

USB
===

To passthrough USB to VM, we need to know the ID for each USB first.

> .. figure:: images/rqi-acrn-usb-port.png

Reviewer 2: The USB port number do not match what's printed on the enclosure, I'm assuming this is the way it is though, isn't it?

Reviewer: Yes, we need to use the number on the picture to passthrough the USB. This number is different from the number on ROScube panel.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the confirmation.
